---
layout: post
title:  "Personalizar los enlaces de Jekyll"
author: raquel
date: '2020-02-18'
category: 
        - Jekyll
        - Static Site Generators
        - Github Pages
image: assets/img/posts/jekyll_permalinks.jpg
image_credit: Pexels user Dids
---

<blockquote>

</blockquote>

If you don't like the web address of the different pages of your web. If you would like to remove the date and categories from your post URLs. If you want that people can remember your post links. Then, this one is for you!
Following all that we already know about Jekyll and how it works with web address. In this article we are learning to configure that URLs as we want.
If you feel missed or want to take a look to previous articles, [understand how URLs are generated] and [adding internal linking] in Jekyll. 

So, there we go!

## Using Jekyll permalinks

`Permalinks` are the output path for your pages or post generated by Jekyll. The URL that we all see in the internet browser of our site is the permalink.
Jekyll allows us configure how this output paths are generated using date, categories, file paths...
We are able to configure this address at different levels as global, using our config file at our project root, or by page.
I'm gonna explain how I have it configured in this page and how I use it, but, if you prefer to know deeper [here is the official documentation](jekyll_permalink).

## Configuring page links

Well, we know what is the permalink now. To set our page URL we need to add `permalink` field at the YAML Front Matter heading of the file. In this heading we can add several fields that we will use to build our web, permalink is also one of them. So, all that you have to add is set in the permalink field the address that you want for this page.

```markdown
---
title: Contact
layout: contact
permalink: /contact
---
```

We can use this format at post files too, adding the permalink field in all of them. But I prefer configure permalink for the full post collection. Just keep reading to discover it!

## Configuring post links

In this case, we will be using an example with the before and after of the changes in the web address. This link is this post URL created with the Jekyll default configuration.

```
https://raquelfishes.github.io/jekyll/static%20site%20generators/github%20pages/2021/02/18/jekyll_permalinks/
```

This link use the format: `categories/date/post_title`.
Just be true, this is the wrost and ugliest link. Anybody want to push on this link, or share with anyone. What do you think of the following link?

```
https://raquelfishes.github.io/blog/jekyll_permalinks
```

From my point of view this is a friendly URL.
How we can get this path type for our posts? Well, we need to do a little change in the web config file `_config.yml` at the root path of the Jekyll project. In that file you have to add this simple code snippet. 

```yaml 
collections:
    posts:
        output: true
        permalink: /blog/:title
```

Like I said, simple. After rebuild the site, Jekyll will spit out the links looking simpler.

## What is next?

This small changes makes a huge difference on our site, it gets more friendly. They will help our website SEO, and the full web look nicer for everyone. Keep reading for more Jekyll website tricks.
In the meantime, I hope you find this article usefull.
Now, have fun!

Thanks for reading!
=)


[jekyll_permalink]: https://jekyllrb.com/docs/permalinks/